inevitable decision. First, as an educational
institution,
I think it was proper that a young man in this
country that wanted to go to college, and
particularly right out of high school,
if he didn't want to enter military training at
that particular time. I don't think it should be
forced on them. This, to me, serves a little bit to
be like a dictatorship. There are some people that
will never be military people. Let's recognize
it. Everybody can't be an engineer. Everybody
can't be a general. Everybody can't be a doctor.
Some people are born to be military, and they're
going to be. I just think it's right. You have a
choice, and that's the basis of our country. Free
enterprise isn't a democracy. Choice, you have
freedom of choice. Okay, how about allowing women
to go there for the first time? I definitely agree
with that. As a matter of fact, let's talk about
that a minute. I'm glad you asked this question.
What was the expression you used when you asked me a
question a few moments ago about the attitude of
some civilians that you call a military
mentality?
I think that to
have a school set up as we have in the past for men
only, this is part of the the concept you're
talking about, military, and I told you it had
changed. Look at all the academies now. Sure. Look
at the increased
recruiting of women. Sure. Incredible. And
furthermore, what's wrong? God made men and women
to communicate and live together. What's wrong
with this?
I think it's great. Furthermore, it's only
natural at an educational institution now to
learn to live with a woman as a kid, as a youngster,
as a teenager, as a young man. It's only natural.
Now, when you're talking about recruiting women
in the armed forces, this is a different question.
I know it's a different question, and let's shift
to that now. You favor the switch of women to A&M.
Now,
do you favor increasing the number of women in the
Air Force? I think we've just about, in time of
peace, and even planning for military
organization, you know, a 100% man unit that's
supposed to be conceived as an outfit ready to go to
combat, I think we've just about approached the
point of the percentage of women in the armed
forces. As a matter of fact, it's already being,
it's coming to the surface. There's many current
officers say of colonel nature that much much
younger than I and a lot of my advantage that
already they see the limitations. We've almost
exceeded limitations. To try to and look at the
legislation that's begun to bubble. Limitations
to try to what? To limitations to be applied to
women where they shouldn't be in combat. This is
wrong. Wait a minute. You think I'm confused. You
think that allowing women into the service is
right, but you feel, and I don't know if I'm putting
words in your mouth, but just for clarification,
you think allowing women into the service is
right, but allowing, but having women
participate in combat is wrong. That's right.
They have a, again, let's go back to leadership.
What did I say? Putting people in positions in
accordance with their weaknesses and strengths.
Okay. You're not going to put women in the front
line of a professional football team, are you? Why
don't we recruit them and put them in there? That's
foolish. I've been in the infantry. I've been in
the artillery. I've been in fighter airplanes.
Actually, I know in Russia, in Russia, they
actually use some women in fighter airplanes at
the front. But this was in wartime when a country
was fighting for its life and had over a generation
of people, young people killed in that. nation. 20
million people killed in World War II. They had to
use people. Now we use women as transport pilots
and ferrying aircraft in World War II and turned
out great, but that's a support role. Women can do
some jobs in support roles, in my opinion, better
than men. Let's use them there. Let's use them in
support roles, but let's don't ever until that,
you know, we're about ready to lose our nation.
Let's don't plan on using women in combat. I agree.
You've heard of General Senglob, who was recalled
from Korea and practically fired by President
Carter. Oh, yeah. I knew him as a colonel in
Southeast Asia. And I agree with him that women in
combat, as a matter of fact, the extent that we
visualize eventually increasing percentage of
women in armed forces, I think deserves a new look.
And here again, you know, I said that the armed
forces reflect the culture and the
characteristics of our civilian population.
Look at the duplication of soldiers you have to
make to treat women the way we in America are taught
to treat women. Ladies and gentlemen, look at the
duplication of soldiers you have to have. There's
just many reasons. In times of emergency, That's a
different thing. Yeah, but in the general
peacetime services, you think mostly their role
should be one of support. I definitely agree. As a
matter of fact, even further, I don't know whether
you get to this or not, but I've been doing a lot of
thinking about the
draft. And, you know, even the courts got involved
in this. Sure. The Congress is involved in it.
We're almost at the point where we're trying to
legislate social life. I definitely, I believe in
the draft. Okay, you believe in the draft. Oh yeah,
there's no doubt about it. Matter of fact, I think
it's the old American tradition and culture that
the American man has a responsibility toward his
country. This is the basis of patriotism. and I
believe it's still there. What about drafting
women? That's the point I'm going to make. I don't
think the number of women that I foresee being in
the armed forces and the role they'll play, I don't
think that it's necessary to lay on a draft for
women. But I think and respect the women and the men
of this country equally alike, and I think that in
time of emergency, you'll have enough young women
that are ready to volunteer to fill their quota in
the armed forces. I don't think you have the
problem. And also, in the support role, generally
speaking, it doesn't take as much time to train
people in that role. To train a combat pilot, that
takes time. Also, to train a crack maintenance
man, electronic equipment, this takes time. Now,
some women can do that. But generally speaking,
the proportion of women that, let's say, we'd have
to get in the service in time of emergency. I think
that wouldn't be so critical, but now, men, that's
a different thing. You've got to get the men
aboard. We should have a draft. I definitely
agree. Okay, now, during the time that you were in
the military, of course, they integrated the
services. Truman issued, I think it was Executive
Order 9066 in 1947,
integrating desegregating the armed forces.
What was your opinion on that? Desegregation.
Sure. Integrated units. I think that the
desegregation and the elimination of what we
consider the minority in this country, the armed
forces should be patted on the back and
complimented from a standpoint of human rights in
being the forerunner of this. Maybe, let's say by
edict, they had to do it, of course. But I think it
was a great idea. I think the Armed Forces was far
ahead of the civilians of this nation, of this
country, in this area, that they're not
comfortable.
Okay, and... I'm all for it. And during your term,
or your career in the service, did you have any
racial problems that you remember You're sitting
here in charge of the 12th in 1967 and 1968, and
these were pretty hot times in the cities, and
there were black riots in the cities. Did you have
any racial problems at all? I don't remember, and I
must have to think a few minutes. I don't remember
having one single racial problem, frankly, in my
entire military career. In your entire military
career? I don't remember. Now, I've read of them. I
certainly read of them, you know, about them in the
South Asian War and overseas. I read of them
recently on board naval vessels at sea. I've read
about these and again, I go back to my statement.
The Armed Forces reflect the culture and nature
and characteristics of civilians. It's
certainly in worse than it is in civilian, but I
think if you have a tendency to have these types of
problems in the civilian world, in the United
States, you have to have the same type of problems
in the military. But you didn't have any. I don't
recall having any. Is this, well, let's go back to
what the previous question we were talking about.
The armed forces were ahead of the world in
integration. And you supported them. Oh, I
remember having, in South Carolina, Shaw Air
Force Base. I remember having colored officers,
blacks, in my outfit and sitting next to them in the
officer's club dining. And those people
understood it. They would have their fellow
blacks sit at a table next to us. There was no
problem. They understood it as well as we did, and
both worked towards solving this problem. I
honestly can't remember any big flag. I remember
little bitty spats. Oh, I remember maybe a black
and an airman having a beer at the NCO because they
might get in a fight. But why wouldn't it spread
with all the blacks and whites? We never did. I
don't remember any real big promise. So what
you're saying is that with every command that
you've been at, the blacks in the command and the
whites in the command that were integrated in all
the time, they worked together to decrease racial
tensions, or is that putting words in your mouth?
Sir, as a matter of fact, I'm aware of what you're
talking about, and I gave it up to the time I got in
command position. I always gave this
consideration and high priority that I went out of
my way to walk across the officer's club lounge to
shake hands with a black officer and his wife. So it
ended along with my wife. I worked at it, but I never
felt any stress to have to do this. I don't remember
a problem in this area. Great, great. Now, as far as
women, women were joining in the 1960s,
especially in the 1970s. The military passed in
the never before. We've already talked about your
ideas in the draft. Did you ever have any problems
with the new women who were coming in in the
enlisted ranks or the officer ranks? Did you have
an increase, especially in the 12th when you were
there? Women, laughs.
The only problem I can remember, again, in my
career with respect to women in the services, at
McCord Air Force Base, when I report front of their
division with my I remember we were increasing. As
a matter of fact, when I arrived at the base, there
was a barracks, a special dormitory set aside for
WAFs. And this is the first time I came up against
anything like this. This was in 1950. Well, when I
reported it to Hamlet in 1957. Something like
that. But I'll figure something out. If I remember
correctly, there were some problems about
some of the airmen. 57. 57. There were some
problems about some of the airmen. Oh, it was a
matter of off-limits.
That's what it was. When I arrived, there were
off-limits signs posted around the WAF barracks.
And this was the first time I'd come across any
faces. And of course, I didn't do anything about it
immediately, but I wondered why and all, you know.
And it was a claim to me that the, well, you know, it
was the first time I'd had anything like this. And
there's so many on this base that sometime the
airmen, you know, they'd get mixed up and the
airmen would come over here and you'd get caught in
the barracks and everything going on being
scandalous, you know, and they had to find it off
limits so that the airmen knew they'd be plenty to
be came on to the dormitory. And I was surprised to
hear this. I didn't do anything at the time, but as
time went on, I think really, I didn't do anything
solid. I think experience and time solved the
problem, and these things faded away, and
eventually those signs were taken down. It wasn't
an insurmountable problem. You know, you had a
little concern about it for a while, but to my
knowledge, that's the only time I remember. Oh, I
remember another time when I was in Thailand.
I forget her position, but she was general,
general home, HRLMS. She was a female general in
Thailand? Right, right. In the Air Force? No, she
was in the Air Force headquarters in personnel,
but she was the head of the... One-star general?
Yeah. I believe she was a one-star general when she
came over to visit. You know, she was making a tour
in the area, just like any other staff officer from
the Pentagon. And we talked about...
women you know being introduced over there in the
units in the in the combat theater and that was a
problem that i'd never thought well it was a
question was brought up i never thought before and
uh when he brought up idea i said i don't know i have
to give this some thought and we discussed it and
talked about it and actually she was all for the
idea see uh i didn't i didn't have a position at oh
and support definitely you know and warehouse you
know Definitely not being in combat. We weren't
near that forward thing yet. Not even she. But
I don't think the question ever was posed to me
again prior
to the time I rotated and came back home. But I don't
ever recall, I don't think we ever saw any women
over there during the war. But she didn't have an
opinion? I mean, you saw the pros and cons, but you
didn't... At that time? You didn't tell her? No,
no, no. As a matter of fact, I thought about it a lot,
and I thought about it a lot after that, and this is
the reason I'm telling you right now,
categorically, if they do go anyplace, and
thinking about, based on my experience over
there, they ought to be in combat roles. I'd have
been a little hard-pressed. Kind of think about
it. Did we not put some labs in 7th Air Force
Headquarters at Thompson News? I don't know. We
may have, but that was, I don't remember
specifically. It seemed like maybe we did try
that. At any rate, not entirely. At least when I was
over there, we did. But I'd have been reluctant.
to, even at that time, to
bring women in to those air bases in South Vietnam
because of the type of warfare over there where the
bases could be martyred, you know, every day and
overrun and actually get in hand-to-hand combat
right on the base. I'm horrified to the thought
we're on a base
in a WAP barracks. It taunts a note that women be
confronted in barracks with invading Vietcongs
with knives in their hands. In the end, it's
expected in combat, not women. Okay, let's ask one
last question about A&M, and that is,
what are your feelings toward integrating A&M? In
1968, we left the first blacks in the A&M, and now we
have blacks equally, or not equally, but blacks
going to A&M. And this is another one of those
changes during General Rutter's time as a
president. What's your idea? What's wrong with
that? It should be done. That's across the board in
this nation.
The United States should be the forerunners in the
world for human rights. And A&M, God bless the
position it is and how proud we are of it, and the in
the front ranks of supplying qualified officers
and airmen to the armed forces, why not supply some
qualified women to the armed forces? Amen. Let's
go. I'm for it. And blacks. And blacks,
definitely. Oh, absolutely. And minorities, if
you will. Women and blacks, definitely. Do you
think it's a better institution today with this
tremendous expansion and all of these changes in
the 1960s than it was a than it was when you went
there after the Second World War? Well, Terry, I
guess, truthfully, I ought to say I'm not sure. I'd
have an opinion, but frankly, I can't answer that
question, because I really don't, I haven't been
on the campus of A&M in years and years. I don't
know. But, thinking back on my experience, the
bigger the outfit, the...
greater the tendency to lose supervisory control
and the more care you have to give and the more
careful you have to pick your key people down the
line to control as you release your detailed
supervision from above and get bigger you have to
delegate that supervision to the lower ones and if
that's if A&M avoids these pitfalls of not, you
know, delegating authority to maintain the
discipline that they had when I was there, and
I'm sure that it would be equal good, and I have all
the confidence in the world, and I'll bet you, I'd
say based on my respect for that place, that I'll
bet you it's as good now as it was then. I'd be
surprised if it wasn't. Well, I'm out of
questions. We've talked about your career, your
early years, A&M, leadership. Is there anything
for the record that you'd like to say before we
close? I mean, is there anything? You're the
expert on your life. Is there anything that we've
missed? That we missed? Well, I mean, any major
changes or anything that you think that we should
talk about? Do you want to see the transcript?
Well, I could do that, but I could just say that if
I had to do it over again, I'd do exactly what I did.
I'd go to A&M as soon as I could. I'd get in the
military as soon as I could. become a fighter pilot
as soon as I could and I'd be in a burst war as soon as I
could be that we got into I'd be there and I'd strive
to be promoted up the ladder and be just as
ambitious as I did before I loved it then and I still
think
I still think that the Air Force is the greatest
organization in the world I'd do it again Well,
that's an appropriate way to go.